---
title: SHA-Bundle-Digest
authors:
  - '@theishshah'
reviewers:
  - '@camilamacedo86'
  - '@joelanford'
  - '@jmrodri'
  - '@ryantking'
  - '@tlwu2013'
approvers:
  - '@tlwu2013'
  - '@jmrodri'
  - '@joelanford'

creation-date: 2022-01-14

last-updated: 2022-01-14

status: implementable
---

# Support SHA-based Image Tags

## Summary

Currently, operators generated by `operator-sdk` will store and retrieve container images based on the image name and
the image tag in the bundle. This EP adds support to `operator-sdk` such that images can be stored and retrieved in the
bundle with an image name and an image digest as an optional replacement for a tag. Image digests are SHA-256 sums that
are hashed from the image layer therefore uniquely identifying one specific image.

## Motivation

Many users run Kubernetes in an air-gapped environment (also known as an offline or disconnected environment), which is
when a cluster network does not have any access to the public internet, usually for security purposes. In this setup,
the digest of an image will be different than it is in the public repository since the image location changes. For
example, if a user imports the image `quay.io/golang:1.17` into their air-gapped registry as
`quay.internaldomain.net/golang:1.17`, the digest of the image will be different due to the different name even though
the contents of the images are identical. Using digest SHAs instead of tags in the air-gapped environment will keep the
digest from changing registry to registry.

### Goals

- Give users the ability to enable digest-based image resolution
- Allow users to specify additional images to resolve digests for.
- Add ability to resolve image digests from image tag dynamically using local docker registry.

### Non-Goals

- Provide an automated way to migrate existing Operator-SDK-based operators from image tags to image digests.
- Identify locations in user code that reference images by tag.

## Proposal

- Add `--use-image-digests` to `operator-sdk generate bundle` command. When enabled, the CLI will:
  - Search the environment defined in `manager.yaml` for all variables that begin with `RELATED_IMAGE_` to build a list
    of all images that need digests in the output cluster CSV.
  - Resolve the digests for the operator image and any additional related images it finds in the environment.
  - Output the images with digests instead of tags in the cluster CSV.
- Add a variable to the `Makefile` called `USE_IMAGE_DIGESTS`.
- During bundle generation, discover all environment variables that begin with `RELATED_IMAGE_` then resolve the tags to
  digests. These variables should be set in `config/manager/manager.yaml` as suggested in
  [https://master.sdk.operatorframework.io/docs/best-practices/common-recommendation/#other-common-suggestions](https://master.sdk.operatorframework.io/docs/best-practices/common-recommendation/#other-common-suggestions).
- Update CSV relatedImages with resolved image tags to digests

```yaml
# Image w/ traditional tags
- name: RELATED_IMAGE_che_server_secure_exposer_jwt_proxy_image
  value: quay.io/eclipse/che-jwtproxy:0.10.0

# Image w/ SHA based digest
- name: RELATED_IMAGE_single_host_gateway
  value: quay.io/eclipse/che--traefik:v2.5.0-eb30f9f09a65cee1fab5ef9c64cb4ec91b800dc3fdd738d62a9d4334f0114683
```

### Risks and Mitigations

Since the feature is opt-in, it carries the risk of the end-user enabling it without a correct understanding of the
feature and its implications. This can be mitigated with clear documentation both on the website and in the CLI help
section.

## Design Details

- As of this EP, the new `--use-image-digests` is the only flag to pass to the `operator-sdk generate bundle` command.
  In order to allow users full control over the command's flags, the `Makefile` should use an intermediary variable to
  hold the flags that a user can overwrite entirely. For example:

```Makefile
GENERATE_BUNDLE_FLAGS ?= ""
USE_IMAGE_DIGESTS ?= false
ifeq ($(GENERATE_BUNDLE_FLAGS),"")
    ifeq($(USE_IMAGE_DIGESTS),true)
        GENERATE_BUNDLE_FLAGS += "--use-image-digests"
    endif
endif
bundle:
    operator-sdk generate bundle $(GENERATE_BUNDLE_FLAGS)
```

- The `RELATED_IMAGE_*` variables should be defined in the `manager.yaml` file as outlined
  [here](https://master.sdk.operatorframework.io/docs/best-practices/common-recommendation/#other-common-suggestions).
- In order to resolve digests from tags, the CLI will use the `imageresolver` package in
  [operator-manifest-tools](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-manifest-tools).
- The output cluster CSV will have the `relatedImage` annotation that is explained in the
  [OpenShift Documentation](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.9/operators/operator_sdk/osdk-generating-csvs.html#olm-enabling-operator-for-restricted-network_osdk-generating-csvs).

### Test Plan

The resulting artifact of this EP will be a cluster CSV with image digests instead of tags in the image definitions as
well as digest annotations. This feature will need an integration test that veifiesthat the knobs we provide to enable
and configure image digests generates an expected CSV. The expected CSV will be based off of the existing memcached CSV,
located
[here](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/blob/master/testdata/go/v3/memcached-operator/bundle/manifests/memcached-operator.clusterserviceversion.yaml)
with the `spec.relatedImages` section from the proposal section added to it.

## Implementation History

There has been no implementation to this point.

## Drawbacks

The original motivation for this feature is used in a disconnected environment with an SDK-built operator, OLM, and OCP.
Performing a full E2E test in a complex environment that will need to be specifically built out for this task is out of
scope for this SDK EP.

## Alternatives

We are not considering any alternative solutions at this time.

## Open Questions

- Operator-manifest-tools relies on an external binary, skopio. In order to remove the external binary, can we PR
  operator-manifest-tools to replace the calls to the skopeo CLI with library calls?
- Store digest and tag mappings in file so that user-written code can resolve tags to digest.
- What is the function of `spec.relatedImage.name`?
- How are the values of `spec.relatedImage.name` used?

## Appendix A

The following is an example of an image manifest for `golang:1.17.6`:

```json
[
  {
    "Config": "8b86bf336a01235faf28137dae90772076e6f431a2951259d949eb9153012755.json",
    "RepoTags": ["golang:1.17.6"],
    "Layers": [
      "644b6e1dc104cf7c01e3d906bad42ca6386e62e03ba55c23c9229eeca2aedf4e/layer.tar",
      "dbaefc91c060fe8e827580d1018824c5479bb8eeadf644b44f9bbdc6cc0ad314/layer.tar",
      "7164fcc370aec09c29fb107f4b404d667a046d7eb652130cfcad3b493d7f9485/layer.tar",
      "ded273d40fe1a66f4cc0e6cc15236a8800c4e465df4df2b682422a5477910951/layer.tar",
      "eac35aa9198a17ca6942cda2efacf8b052fcfd7c9046cace7290a0b80bd43d7b/layer.tar",
      "34cd146535bd6d8585e4bc411593bc82a336a335fbcc0a1cf78b1ecfe635c549/layer.tar",
      "0aafe4d111d6dbd2414e183de18f5736f470de5b0e750b05bbe4063f00366386/layer.tar"
    ]
  }
]
```

The manifest is built out of a list of layers, repo tags, and a config file. Since the config file and layers themselves
are hashed, if any of them change or the repo tags, the manifest digest will change.

## Appendix B

A `ClusterServiceVersion` is a [CRD](https://olm.operatorframework.io/docs/concepts/crds/clusterserviceversion/) defined by [Operator Lifecycle Manager](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-lifecycle-manager) that defines metadata about the entire operator.

````

An example CSV for the Memcached example operator is available [here](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/blob/master/testdata/go/v3/memcached-operator/bundle/manifests/memcached-operator.clusterserviceversion.yaml).

This EP will change two things on the CSV: use digests in deployment container image locations and add the `spec.relatedImages` section with all other images, such as base images, that need to have a digest resolved from a tag. An abbreviated version of the CSV with the aforementioned changes looks like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: operators.coreos.com/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterServiceVersion
metadata:
  # ...
spec:
  # ...
  install:
    spec:
      # ...
      deployments:
        - name: memcached-operator-controller-manager
          spec:
            # ...
            template:
              # ...
              spec:
                containers:
                  - args:
                    # ...
                    image: gcr.io/kubebuilder/kube-rbac-proxy@sha256:e10d1d982dd653db74ca87a1d1ad017bc5ef1aeb651bdea089debf16485b080b
                    # ...
                  - args:
                    # ...
                    image: quay.io/example/memcached-operator@sha256:d044b878fbcbd0c06c2bcc050f3f9ca070ffb089e6bac01accddcd0ba85b7b9e
                    # ...
      # ...
    # ...
  # ...
  relatedImages:
    - name: golang:1.17
      image: golang:8d717e8a7fa8035f5cfdcdc86811ffd53b7bb17542f419f2a121c4c7533d29ee
    - name: gcr.io/distroless/static:nonroot
      image: gcr.io/distroless/static:741704ac0e5e6ff758a8c46f0f028375252fdf147248d95514ce11ff57fdece9
````

## Appendix C

Example `manager.yaml` containing correctly populated RELATED IMAGE environment variables.

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  # ...
spec:
    # ...
    template:
    # ...
    spec:
        containers:
            env:
                name:  RELATED_IMAGE_single_host_gateway
                value: quay.io/eclipse/che--traefik:v2.5.0-eb30f9f09a65cee1fab5ef9c64cb4ec91b800dc3fdd738d62a9d4334f0114683
        # ...
        - args:
            # ...
        # ...
      # ...
    # ...
  # ...
```
